---
layout: post
title:  "Review of the Google Tech Dev Guide: Foundations of Programming"
tags: courses software-engineering
---

As part of an extended project at work, I am going through various resources
about software engineering and assessing whether they will be helpful learning
material for other staff at the lab. Therefore, this will hopefully be the
first in a series of posts on handy software engineering courses and the like.

First on my list was the [Google Tech Dev
Guide](https://techdevguide.withgoogle.com/), and I had high hopes that it
would contain lots of useful material on software development given the
prominence of Google in this sector. Spoiler: it didn't live up to the
expectations.

![Google Tech Dev Guide Landing
Page](/assets/images/google-tech-dev-guide_front_page.png)

There are many different "paths" available with the guide, and I opted for the
[Foundations of
Programming](https://techdevguide.withgoogle.com/paths/foundational/),
following the "recommended sequence" therein.

![Google Tech Dev Guide Foundations of
Programming](/assets/images/google-tech-dev-guide_foundations_description.png)

## Review of Course

**Learning Objectives:** Having been trained as a computational physicist, my
software engineering skills exist but have been developed sporadically, as and
when I needed them. I am looking to round out my proficiency in and awareness
of software engineering good practices.

**How would you evaluate your skill level in the material covered by the
course?** Intermediate.

**Was the course too easy or too difficult?** The majority of the problems were
quite easy. Not trivial, but not helping me learn much new.

**Was the course useful to you?** Yes and no. For my stated learning
objectives, it fell short of the mark. I have not gained the general software
engineering skills that I wanted. However, there were some important
fundamentals of computer science that I was exposed to, predominantly by the
first problem of the course. E.g. Big-O notation, analysis of algorithms,
greedy algorithms, profiling Python code, hash tables, binary search, etc.

**What did you like?** The first problem "Find longest word in dictionary 
that is a subsequence of a given string" on the surface seemed easy but had
some nice lessons to be learned and computer science concepts underlying it.
Well worth the effort to go through it, and there is still more that I could
have done. A separate lesson links to a YouTube video on hash tables was a nice
introduction to this fundamental data structure. 

**What did you not like?** The majority of the course is solving coding
problems, and the ones I did were below my experience level and quite easy. I
am all for learning by doing, but this course lacked a structured tuition
component. Moreover, some of the problems require Java, which is not a language
I am planning to learn or use in the immediate future. The resources on testing
and debugging did not look good so I didn't even bother.

**How would you rate the course overall?** 6

**Other comments?** My stated learning objectives were obviously misaligned
with the content of the course, but even still, I think there are better
learning resources out there than this one. It should also be noted I did about
a quarter of the content because of this.
